Crustcluster1

The set selected by Frederik is a good training set because it is a
rather difficult one: large magnitude (so few high frequencies) and
small depth (so mixups with pP possible, certainly for AIC).

I just went through it, it took me 95 minutes. Not all events gave
useful data. If there is no measurable onset for a Mermaid, it is not
worth to pick the island stations since they have enough duplicate
raypaths from the other events. In that case I erased the add_to file,
but if I did pick there are still picks listed in the out.pointa file.

I attach my picking notes, though not the picks themselves so as not
to influence you too much. Feel free to ignore them!

Best wishes,

Guust

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
20180928 - weak foreshock, main shock about 6s later. sizas.pdf shows
low amplitudes for almost all stations, starting down. Several nearby
stations such as KWJN, HNR, PMG start down, but the polarity of the
inflexion 6s later seems to go up in PMG, NOUC, MSVF. Mermaids are
very ambiguous. pP comes in after 7.2s in the Mermaids. Separate SAC
plot of MSVF, FUTU, and Mermaids (all at azi 100-110) shows no clear
onset in the Mermaids, and often ambiguous ones in land stations. I
rejected the event because without the Mermaids there is only
duplicate information to be expected.

20211214 - P48 and P49 seem to have a visible onset. It is late but
all are late.  The stf shows complicated rupture with multiple shocks,
but no weak foreshock. Polarity should be down (followed by up pP
after ~4s, but that is when the 2nd shock kicks in) excepth perhaps
for 20<azi<100 (GUMO-HNR).  DAV, NOUC I didn't dare pick.  DZM is up,
even though predicted down. Are we seeing pP here all the time?

I started to doubt the earlier readings as being pP (and that is why
they are so late). so I typed <r> to repeat and check (with tbias=0 on
the basis of the stf plot). Note that this erases the add_to file you
every pick has to be redone.  The plot of delays looks coherent, so I
decided to accept this event.

20180819 - the map plot of Mermaids made me fear the worst! Plotting
them with <xlim t0 -20 t0 +20> (to get a better view od noise level
than in the pplt plots) and <p1 rel> shows possible onsets in P07,09
and 10.  This time depth is 29 km, so hopefully no interference with
pP (9s after P).  POlariry should be UP except for DAV.  P07,08 is
picked from the hp, just before F, P10, P11 also but at F. Residu plot
looks coherent, with PMG and HNR influenced by fast subduction
zones. Accept.

20180805 - Polarities are wll predicted, all up except DAV. We are now
looking at somwehat lower magnitudes and the Mermaids clearly benefit
from the higher frequency. I did not dare pick noisy FUNA. PAYG is at
152 deg, the signal looks like a local but is in reality PKPdf
(predicted at 1185.4s). No need to pick it (it would need its own
add_to file as PKP, information is already in ISC data).  Same for
OTAV,JTS,HDC. Residu plot OK: Accept.

20190412 - polarity evenly divided between down at azi<120 and up >
120, except DAV.  N01, P10 and 11 are in nodal plane, not sure I can
pick them, so I made a sac plot in a separate terminal using <xlim t0
-20 t0 +20> and <p1 rel> with them and nearby AFI, MSVF. AFI and MSVF
shows P down with delay of 3s.  It seems F picks the pP wave, no
suprise a P is in the nodal plane. hp does not help. Foreshock 4s
before main gives extra complications. I rejected this event.

20190714 - polarity up except DAV, and CTAO, MSVF P10 in nodal plane.
P10 has no clear onset (F picks pP which is early). Reject since the
only Mermaid did not allow picking.

20190122 - stf seems OK, good for hp. P06 is near nodal plane, on hp F
picks it slightly late. Residu plot OK. Accept.

20210726 - polarity all strong down except DAV. Depth 11 km so watch
out for mixup with pP. Separate plot of P11 and P48 with NOUC and DZM
shows similar weak down onset in both mermaids just before pP. Accept.

At this point I have been picking for almost an hour (8
events). PAUSE.

20200318 - polarity down, DAV in nodal plane. I compared XMAS and P29
in separate plot, both show pP but no clear P -> no Mermaid data ->
Reject.

20210114 - polarity up everywhere. Nice stf. But h=18 km, pP mixup
possible.  P29 shows ghost after 2s. P48 goes up at 615.7 and their is
a hint of a ghost when the upward swing at 617.5 in interrupted just
after that, so I trust my pick even though it is ambiguous. I dare not
pick P49. In the residu plot it looks like SNZO is picked too early,
so I checked it again with sac but it looks fine. Accept.

20221206 - only one Mermaid (P10), at large distance, predicted onset
down. Nice stf which should allow for hp. I picked the small down
wiggle just before pP (and confirmed it by hp at 0.3 Hz in separate
plot). All 4 residues are pretty late, but this event is south of the
subduction zone so rays are not speeded up.  Accept.

20220221/ - polarities all up. Only one mermaid P53 (how come we have
numbers >49?).  M53 onset is visible after F, just before pP, on the
unfiltered record. Accept.

THE END (total time: 95 minutes).






