NOTES

General remarks:
================

Often the high-pass (hp) shows a sharper onset somewhat earlier of
later than the unfiltered record. 

In that case I usually assume that the microseismic noise has moved
the onset a bit away from its arrival and prefer to trust the hp
record. 

Except when the onset itself has no high frequencies, so that the 1 Hz
high pass is not the best one (often for shallow quakes).  

I sometimes openen up a second window to se what a 0.5 Hz hi-pass would
do. If so I edit the doppk file to have <hp co 0.5> before hitting <r>
to repeat the picking.

If the onsets are ambiguous, it often helps to plot close stations in
a seperate window using SAC's <p1 rel> command and study the coherence
of possible onset polarity.

It also helps to plot records in a separate terminal window over a
larger time window, e.g. using SAC: xlim t0 -20 t0 +10 to have a
better view of pre-onset noise before picking.

Clarification: 
==============

JDS: Are you saying that the microseismic noise can “drown out” (be
bigger than) the arrival in the unfiltered record?  I don’t understand
the phrase “...microseismic noise has moved the onset a bit…”.

GN: As for Joel’s question about microseismic noise and displacement
of the peak, think of noise sin(w1*t) with amplitude 1 and superimpose
a signal eps*sin(w2*t+phi) with small amplitude eps and frequency
w2>>w1.

The sin(w1*t) will have a slope at the point where the small signal
has a maximum. So the peak of the sum of the two will be displaced. If
the *onset* is sharp, the onset itself can not be displaced. But if
you cannot spot an onset, your eye will be guided by the small wiggle
and intuitively trace back from a peak. If the slope is large, you
wouldn’t even see a small local peak but just an inflexion.  By the
way, I noticed AIC is powerful in noticing those inflexions and used
it often to guide my eye.

This situation is usually improved by picking from the high-passed
record, provided there is enough signal power > 1 Hz. The mkdoppk
script that I wrote created the SAC macro doppk which plots a
high-passed version above the unfiltered record, so you have the
choice where to pick.

Small magnitude events usually have enough power > 1 Hz, larger
crustal events not. I have been able to accept many picks from deep
events in the M4 range, but had to reject picks of crustal events in
the M5 range.

As I wrote before, the only disadvantage of picking the hp record is
that the pick is not stored in the header as pointer “A”.  This
pointer is not used anywhere but comes in handy when you wish to check
at a later stage.  

I wrote a little program pointa.f90 that can fix that by reading the
APF file and writing it into the header of the SAC file. I’ll put that
program in PickCode/ on ariel.


Notes on some events:
=====================

20180907/Q00: The three with lowest azimuth GUMO WAKE and KWJN have
large pP, not to be confused with P.  One must pick all DOWN, even if
hp sometimes seems to go UP.  Skip FUNA, P08. I pick P9 and P10, P12
on the hp, going Down.

20180908/DATA/Q02: P09 is clearly in the UP, but MSVF may be wrongly
predicted as it is near the nodal zone, as is P07, which I dare not
pick. P09 is a bit of a gamble.  HNR has strong pPn but no pickable
Pn.

20180908/DATA/Q02: P12 is near node, as is P09 that shows strong
pP. None of them have island records with close azimuth. The UP in HNR
is not clear enough for pick.

20180908/DATA/Q03: complicated radiation pattern, many near nodal
plane.  Small onstes therefor to be expected with different
polarity. Fortunately no pP to distract (depth 93km). Neither P08 nor
P11 is very close. TAU not clear. I gambled and picked P11 on the
downward onset 0.5s before F.

20180909/DATA/Q00: radiation pattern is good predictor, but many
records near nodal plane. I did not dare picking FUTU. P08, P09, P10
is much earlier than F. P12 is predicted UP, but the swing at 340s is
very late, so perhaps it is the swing just before F? P13 is not
clear. P16 is predicted UP (like RAR and PPTF, both close), P17 is on
the nodal plane, but there is no clear up ghost following the down F
so I skip it (also because it is at large distance). P19 (hp down just
before F) has an up ghost. Idem P20. Note the difference the high pass
makes!

20180910/DATA/Q01: CAN, NOUC, DZM, CTAO, PMG are all DOWN, as
predicted, but for positive azimuth polarity is more ambiguous. FUNA,
P06 and MSVF are predicated in the nodal zone, P08 is borderline -
confusion with pP is likely. In fact, apparent onsets are much closer
to pP or pPn in those stations. I decided to pick pP(n) instead, for
which I widened the xlim in doppk. pP onset not clear in PMG, NOUC,
CAN, FUNA, COYC which I did not pick. Renamed add_to_datafile.P18796
add_to_pP_datafile.P18796.

20180910/DATA/Q02: polarities at most stations as predicted except
WAKE, FUT, P06 and P10 are near node, so up for grabs.

20180911/DATA/Q00: all three close and esay to pick.

20180915/DATA/Q00: predictions OK.

20180924/DATA/Q00: predictions OK, all MM should have onset DOWN
except P06.  SNZO is UP.

20180926/DATA/Q00: P08 should be down, I therefore picked the small
wiggle just before F.

20180926/DATA/Q01: P06 should be up, P08 is near node, it looks like F
picked it OK

20180928/DATA/Q00: all Mermaids near nodal plane... WAKE not
clear. The F in P09 is pP, not P. None of the MM were picked.

20180928/DATA/Q00: stf shows foreshock about 6s before main rupture,
polarity predictable. But little signs of a foreshock that early in
the records. P11 must be up when compared to P10 and RAR, but up onset
ambiguous. I decided 0.2s after F, which is followed after almost 2s
by a ghost down. P24 also up, 1s before F.  UNW, JTS skipped.

20180930/DATA/Q00: both P06 and P08 in nodal region. P06 is sharp, P08
must probably go down like AFI (F seems right). TAOE is blue so I pick
the small upswing.

20181009/DATA/Q00: P06 is near node but close to red, so I pick the
swing just before F, from the hp.

20181010/DATA/Q00: P06 is in the blue, but I do not see a clear
onset. Very uncertain in other stations also.

20181010/DATA/Q00: weak event but som sharp onsets

20181012/DATA/Q00: predictions not perfect, but MSVF, FUTU predict P06 down, 
which is visible about 0.6s before F.

20181013/DATA/Q00: Many stations near node around 140 azimuth. P06 has
same azi as FUNA and FUTU, both UP even though predicted down. hp at
0.5Hz seems to show F is right on the upswing.

20181013/DATA/Q01: polarity predictions not very good. P06 is
predicted UP like MSVF, but FUTU is closer and DOWN. AFI is close to
P08 and down. I picked as F in P06.

2018/20181016/DATA/Q00: P13 and P19 not picked, too uncertain (F got
pP instead of P in P19).

20181021/DATA/Q00: weak event but sharp onsets.

20181023/DATA/Q00: idem, except for NOUK.

20181024/DATA/Q00: idem

20181024/DATA/Q01: danger of pP pick

20181025/DATA/Q00: predictions OK: P08 up, P10 down, P09 near node (I
picked down from the hp).

20181026/DATA/Q00: it looks like we have sharp onsets here, I picked
from the hp

20181029/DATA/Q00: every onset is up and as predicted, but slightly
emergent, take care not to pick too late. Also, the hp may filter out
some of this low-frequency onset. P12 has F down, about 1s too early
if picked from hp.  P10,P09 have correct polarity for F but hp shows
onset 0.5s earlier. The hp seems to mask the upswing for P08 (the
onset is emergent, thus lp), I skip it.

20181030/DATA/Q00: polarity predictions OK (all up except CAN,TAU),
the stf is clean but with dominant period of 2s risks being filtered
out at hp. P06 is too noisy, no up onset visible. P11 idem. I pick P13
3s before F, P16,P18 close to F. Tried hp at 0.5Hz, but no luck for
P06 or P11 to see a positive onset like nearby island stations.

2018/20181101/DATA/Q00: expect onset down on all record, except
perhaps NNA.  Picked dwn on 18 and 19 even though followed by later up
of larger amplitude.

2018/20181102/DATA/Q00: all expected up except for DAV. F OK in P11,
slightly late in P12, P13

2018/20181102/DATA/Q00: Iffy, but picked P06 and P09.

2018/20181103/DATA/Q01: sharp onset in MSVF is preceded by weaker
signal, which I picked

2018/20181104/DATA/Q00: expect all up.

2018/20181110/DATA/Q00: Mermaids near node. No pick for P09, P10, P18,
P06. MSVF is on node and shows pP but not P.

2018/20181114/DATA/Q01: comparsion with island stations shows onset
must be high frequency, in P06 just before F, picked from hp. I did
not dare pick DZM.

2018/20181116/DATA/Q00: nearby stations indicate P06 must be up. F is
outlier and down, no clear onset so I skipped it.

2018/20181118/DATA/Q00: Mermaids are mostly in the down onset zone,
picked them from the hp, all slightly beforen F.

2018/20181118/DATA/Q00: P06 is in nodal zone, no clear onset.

2018/20181119/DATA/Q01: small but sharp onset allows pick of P06 and
FUTU, MSVF, AFI (from hp).

2018/20181120/DATA/Q00: not clear in P10, and too early in
AFI. Skipped this event.

2018/20181122/DATA/Q00: P06 must be up, just before F. DZM picked from
hp.

2018/20181123/DATA/Q00: I picked P06 up.

2018/20181127/DATA/Q00: P08 and P09, P10 are in down region. Picked
P10 from hp.  P06 is on the node but has clear down onset. FUNA must
be up. NOUC must be down but is not clear.

2018/20181127/DATA/Q01: did not pick TAU

2018/20181127/DATA/Q02: picked P06 on down swing just before F.

2018/20181127/DATA/Q03: P06 down as in FUZU

2018/20181129/DATA/Q00: P08 must go down, I pick the drop alomst 3s
after F.

2018/20181130/DATA/Q00: all are predicted down. Both POHA and UNM show
an emergent onset 2s before the sharp break, therefore I use rdapf2
with a 2s tbias (after repeating picks). This is also the onset
selected by F.

2018/20181202/DATA/Q00: P06 predicted down, but near node and in
reality clearly up.

2018/20181202/DATA/Q02: P06 is near FUTU which is up. I think F is
correct when viewed on hp.

2018/20181202/DATA/Q03: picked AFI from hp.

2018/20181205/DATA/Q01: Mw 7.5, so checking CTAO and CAN it seems
there is an emergent onset at 1.3s before the sharper onset, predicted
down for most except FUNA,FUTU and P06, and some are near node. AFI is
near node and MSVF also, shows pP only. F is almost 4s late for
P06. P08 sees pP but P not clear, P10, P12, P13, P17, P16, P21 picked
from hp. P11, P21, P23 near node, not clear. After picking (and typing
<n> to avoid automatic rdapf2) I redid apf2 manually with a larger
error of 0.8 and tbias 1.4.

2018/20181206/DATA/Q01: polarity predictions not very reliable near 50
deg azimuth. P08 not clear near node.

2018/20181207/DATA/Q00: P10 picked from hp just before F. MSVF has pP
but not P.

2018/20181211/DATA/Q00: all expected positive. Main shock is 5s after
foreshock, that is the one picked (tbias 5s). P20, P21, P22 not clear,
must be up when compared to nearby but no clear up onset
visible. However, after plotting all mermaids using <P1 relative>
there is a ppositive wiggle that lines up. I therefore repeated
picking for these and used tbias 5s.  I manually changed the 0.57
errors in the add_to file to 0.98 (adding st dev of 0.8 to 0.57)

2018/20181213/DATA/Q00: too noisy, skipped

2018/20181214/DATA/Q00: P06 is close enough to MSVF to warrant the
upswing to be picked as onset, just before F.

2018/20181216/DATA/Q00: most records at larger distances and in the
red zone, but multiple stations show positive onset.  F seems to be a
little too late for P06, P09 altoo early for P08. P10 ambiguous.  GUMO
picked from hp.  Plotting using <p1 rel> with <hp 0.5> convinces me
picking positve onsets is OK.  Before repeating the picking I edited
doppk to high pass at 0.5 instead of 1, and changed my mind on a
handful of onsets. However, I consider this event somewhat iffy and
manually raised the error in add_to_datafile.P18879 to 0.98s.

2018/20181218/DATA/Q01: polarity predictions not reliable (often
contradicted by the FDSN stations).

2018/20181219/DATA/Q00: RAR is in between PPTF (up) and MSVF (up) so
should be up, FUTU too.  P18, P16, P17 predicted down, but too
ambiguous to pick. P10 is clear (down) on the hp.

2018/20181220/DATA/Q00: P06 has clear ghost after 2s on hp, and F
seems on the spot.

2018/20181220/DATA/Q01: too uncertain, skipped

2018/20181220/DATA/Q02: all predicted down but near azi 130 many are
up. Main shock about 2-3s after weak onset. F in P06, P08, P09 is too
late but onset of main is emergent and thus not very accurate. P17
picked from hp. Before hitting repeat, edited doppk to hp at 0.5 Hz,
which helped confirm pick for P06. Changed error in
add_to_datafile.P18886 to 0.98.

2018/20181222/DATA/Q00: P06 not clear, F picks with residue of 13s
(pP? arrives after 8s). Nor did I dare pick P09.

2018/20181223/DATA/Q00: strong quake at depth but many onsets
ambiguous.  Mermaids should go up, but stronger swing is often
down. After plotting mermaids over larger window I saw that F usually
picks near an up, so I repeteated the picking with that in mind and
added some that I earlier considered ambiguous. F does a good job
here.

2018/20181226/DATA/Q01: polarity prediction wrong for HNR, P06 on
node. P12 not clear, should go down like PPTF.
